Of all the recent defections in Uttar Pradesh, influential OBC leader Swami Prasad Maurya joining the Samajwadi Party may have some implications in the upcoming assembly elections. The development led to a spate of resignations by sitting BJP MLAs within hours, and if Maurya’s camp is to be believed, more such exits will follow in the next few days. However, this is but one of the many recent instances of incumbent members of the legislative assembly or other influential leaders switching sides. While politicians jumping ship before elections is not uncommon, more so in India’s most populated state, is it just personal ego or the winnability factor that propel such defections? The two simultaneous trends discernible in the last four assembly elections offer some answers. First, UP has transitioned from throwing up fractured mandates earlier to handing out quite decisive ones now. Second, the success rate of first-timers as opposed to experienced candidates, though consistently relatively high, has been witnessing a spike since 1996. The latter, of the rookie triumphing over veterans, indicates that winnability depends much more on party affiliations than on the candidates’ stature. Hence the scramble among potential candidates to get the party right before elections, just to give themselves a fighting chance of returning as MLAs. Advantage debutants in UP
India Today Data Intelligence Unit (DIU) analysed numbers of all assembly elections in UP since 1980. Data show that barring a few exceptions, first-timers have occupied 70 per cent or more seats in all assemblies in the last four decades. The proportion was the lowest at 65 per cent in 1996 and the highest in 2017 at 78 per cent.The 2017 elections also happened to be the most decisive, with the BJP winning nearly 80 per cent of the seats. As many as 314 debutants won the elections that year. There were 59 second-term MLAs and 15 with experience of two previous terms. In contrast, the 2002 verdict was fractured, with the then single largest party, Samajwadi Party, winning just 143 of the total 403 seats. There were 268 first-term MLAs that year. In 2002, one out of five winners had at least one previous term as an MLA. The share of second-term MLAs dropped to one out of seven in 2017. The salience of experience, thus, has gone down considerably even as the premium commanded by first-timers has gone up several notches “The key takeaway of the last few decades has been one of increasing preference for parties rather than candidates among Indian voters. CSDS surveys have also shown that the proportion of people making up their minds well in advance as to which party to choose has gone up a lot. In other words, the proportion of committed voters today is much higher than what was the case in the 1990s,” Sanjay Kumar, director of Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS), told India Today a while ago. Kumar has tracked Lok Sabha and assembly elections for nearly three decades and written extensively on UP elections. While preference for parties has gone up, incumbent MLAs have had a tough time getting renominations and returning as legislators. In the last four elections, only 40 per cent or fewer incumbent MLAs got renominated by their parties. In fact, in the 2012 elections, only a third of those who’d won the last polls contested again. And only 41 per cent of the re-contesting candidates emerged victorious that year. The winning percentage of re-contesting candidates was less than 30 per cent in 2017. The data establish that local-level incumbency has increasingly become a liability, and hence the reluctance on the part of political parties to renominate candidates. Party hoppers don’t do well. Yet nother noticeable trend of the last four decades has been the not-so-impressive performance of turncoats. Numbers reveal that among those who switch sides ahead of elections, the probability of only those siding with the eventual winner is higher. For instance, the success rate of those who switched to the BSP ahead of the 2007 elections was an impressive 100 per cent. It can be recalled that the BSP had come out on top in that election. Similarly, the success rate of defectors who contested as SP candidates in 2012 was 68 per cent, and on BJP tickets in 2017 a whopping 84 per cent. The SP won the polls in 2012 and BJP five years later. The performance of defectors not getting the party right has been relatively lacklustre otherwise. As the average of last 10 assembly elections shows, less than 15 per cent of party hoppers have re-entered the assembly, which is on the lower side. Therefore, all data clearly indicate that local MLAs face voters’ ire, perhaps cushioning their parties against any impact of fierce anti-incumbency. It looks like the trend may continue, given that some of the incumbents are getting restless this time as well.